---
title: "DeGoogling My Life Away"
tag:
- cybersecurity
- opensource
---

It's been about a year since I entirely got rid of Google from my life, well, almost entirely. I still have my Gmail account, and a YouTube channel, and I now use a Google Pixel, heck, this website is searchable on Google.

So I haven't *entirely* got rid of Google, but I've been taking steps to slowly stop using Google's services as much as I can.

# Why? Google is so convenient.

I swear I'm not crazy.

<p style="text-align: center;">
    <video autoplay loop width=480px>
    <source src="/blog/images/conspiracy.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
    </video> 
</p>

If you're reading this post you probably have an idea of why someone might want to DeGoogle, but if not, here's a rundown:

Google is everywhere. If you've read 1984 by *George Orwell* you'll have an idea of Big Brother. Google is Big Brother.

Ads on a website? Google Ads.

Analytics for your blog? Google Analytics.

Fonts you see on a page? Google Fonts.

By just visiting most websites, you're being exposed to Google in some way or another.

Kind of creepy right? It's like someone following all your moves without you knowing.

If you use the internet, Google is going to be trying to find out what you ate for dinner last night... every night. So unless you live underground in a fallout bunker with no access to the internet, getting rid of Google is nearly impossible.

But we can definitely minimise how much Google knows about us.

***"Why should I care, I don't have anything to hide and why would anyone be interested in my life?"***

This is the argument that most people present when the topic of internet privacy comes up and how companies love to collect data on us, and to those people, I say you're missing the point.

In a world that's run by large tech corporations (*looking at you FAANG*), it's rare to have a sense of privacy and owning our data.

We've all had the case of talking about something to someone in person then going onto our mobiles and having the same thing pop up as an advert.

So we can conclusively say we're being monitored 24/7 by the devices we **willingly** bought. Does that seem fair?

***"Here's you're new £1,000 phone. It's yours to keep forever and use however you want. Oh, just one thing, it may listen to you from time to time, maybe all the time, who knows, haha..."***

I don't have anything to hide but I certainly don't want to be constantly tracked and watched. 

# Okay, I hear you, what shall I use instead?

Google is good at what they do, like **really** good. Their products are super simple to use, super easy to access and provide super fast results.

They're also really cheap (financially) which is the biggest drawback of truly private solutions; they can be expensive and that may deter a lot of people.

That's why if you just replace Google with another similar corporation, you're just getting into bed with another data hungry entity waiting to suck your soul out through your phone screen.

If you're ready to take the plunge, it may take a while to get used to but it's definitely do-able. Here's what I've done:

| Google | Alternative |
| --- | ----------- |
| Google Search | [DuckDuckGo](https://duckduckgo.com/) |
| Google Chrome | [Firefox](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/new/) |
| Google Maps | [OpenStreetMap](https://www.openstreetmap.org) |
| Gmail | [Protonmail](https://proton.me/mail) |
| Google Calendar | [Proton Calendar](https://proton.me/calendar) |
| Google Drive | [Proton Drive](https://proton.me/drive) |
| Android | [CalyxOS](https://calyxos.org/) |
| YouTube | [NewPipe](https://newpipe.net/) |

# DuckDuckGo

It's open source, it's easy to use, it has better search results and I like the logo, bonus points! Just switch and never look back.

# Firefox

Firefox is better in every single way compared to Google Chrome and I'm glad it's making a comeback from the early 2000s era of the internet. I no longer have to install another RAM to open my browser so I'm saving money **and** time.

# OpenStreetMap

This one is quite difficult, nothing really comes close to the ease of use Google Maps and Apple maps have. You can't just search the name of a shop and get accurate nearby locations like you can with Google Maps, but a few sacrifices for the sake of privacy, OpenStreetMap is enough for me.

One feature I really like is the ability to download regional maps for offline use so if you lose signal whilst you're in the middle of nowhere, at least you'll be able to navigate your way to civilization!

# Proton Mail/Calendar/Drive/VPN

The guys at Proton have created a suite which is trying to be an open source, private and encrypted alternative to Google.

Protonmail is great! I can create up to 15 email alias' to use for different services online (e.g. I create a separate email alias to use for shopping, a separate email alias for apps, a separate email alias for banking etc. which means I'm not giving up my *main* email address and I can track who's sending me spam and from where) and all their emails are encrypted.

Proton Calendar, Drive and VPN are pretty self explanatory and come as part of the Proton bundle. I have no complaints about them and can reliable access everything I need from all my devices.

I would however recommend to self-host your calendar and create a NAS to access your files but that's all getting a bit technical and requires a separate post. I'll be documenting my self-hosting HomeLab journey as it progresses.

The Proton suite is a paid service so may not be suitable for everyone, but if you have the budget and are looking for a good alternative, check them out.

# CalyxOS

The story of going from Apple everything to Apple *almost* nothing will be documented in another post but as part of my journey to DeGoogle I had to break free from the Apple ecosystem and find a different OS to use. 

I've tried both CalyxOS and [GrapheneOS](https://grapheneos.org/). I prefer CalyxOS. I know CalyxOS technically uses MicroG services and GrapheneOS uses a sandboxing system but I like the look of CalyxOS, it runs smoothly on my Pixel 5 as a daily driver and gets consistent updates (before anyone shouts at me and says you're DeGoogling but bought a Google phone??? It was secondhand and it's never been connected to the internet with vanilla Android). Oh and it's open-source so I can check if anything looks weird in the source code for different apps (*or trust someone else does and take their word for it*).

# NewPipe

There isn't really another platform like YouTube to watch videos. Yeah there's [Vimeo](https://vimeo.com/) and [DailyMotion](https://www.dailymotion.com/gb) but I want to watch the creators I've been watching for years on YouTube. NewPipe is basically an open-source front-end for YouTube. So whilst it still gets the videos from Google's YouTube, the app on my phone isn't from Google. Close enough I guess.

<p style="text-align: center;">
    <video autoplay loop width=480px>
    <source src="/blog/images/spongebob-notes.mp4" type="video/mp4">
    Your browser does not support the video tag.
    </video> 
</p>

That's it! You've started your DeGoogling journey.

This won't be ideal for everyone, but **genuinely**, if I can do it, anyone can.

There's definitely some things I can do to take another step down the rabbit hole, but I'm currently happy with my setup and it works for my studies, my work, and my brain to keep it's sanity.


> The price to pay for internet privacy is just a little bit of inconvenience.

> <cite>Someone, somewhere... probably</cite>

> <cite>Tamir</cite>


If you want to lose your mind, check out [r/DeGoogle](https://www.reddit.com/r/degoogle/) where you'll be able to read countless posts about why you should DeGoogle, viable alternatives and general conspiracy stuff about the big G.